it's so easy to portray online that like
you have everything together and your
life is so great and
that's probably how my life looked but
there was a point in time
where i was just so unhappy and i
felt like i didn't have anything i'm
sure
like you'll probably have heard this
from so many different people online and
it's nothing new
but i just wanted to remind you that
everything that you see online is not
real
and a lot of the times people behind
these social media accounts are going
through some really
real stuff
i never heard anyone blame the
technology
of the telephone for the lies they told
i never heard anyone say well you know
it's really easy for people to get the
wrong idea
when all you're doing is communicating
with them by telephone
to update them about what's going on in
your life i never heard anyone try to
shift
blame onto the printed page
or the humble pen by saying well you
know it's really easy to mislead people
it's just really easy for people to get
the wrong
impression about what's going on in your
life
when they only communicate with you you
know through the written word
and of course there's some truth to that
i think it's easier to lie to people
over the telephone than face to face
it's probably easier to
lie in the written word than the spoken
word
right but we don't forget
who it is that's doing the lying
who it is that's misleading and who it
is that's
being misled what i find disturbing
about
maddie's approach to this issue here is
the extent to which she's willing to
shift the blame
onto social media out of the technology
itself right oh it's just
it's just so easy for people to get the
wrong impression about what's going on
your life it's so easy for people to get
misled they get misled
because you're misleading them right
they get lied to because you
are the liar and you don't learn
from making this mistake you don't learn
from your own past duplicity
because you don't even recognize it as
your own you don't look back on it
as your responsibility you just see it
as a funny thing
that somehow your audience got the wrong
idea or that somehow the medium itself
is misleading and you know what there is
a sense in which the telephone is
misleading there's a sense in which the
newspaper article is misleading
there is a sense in which if the only
way your parents knew what was going on
in your life
was through handwritten letters probably
you would have a huge struggle just to
let your parents know what really was
going on your life to really get it
across to them what the situation is
through the written word
and to not let them be misled
i think all of us have to face up to a
higher
level of responsibility than just not
lying right then just not being you know
not being a scam artist right i think
all of us actually have to deal with a
much higher level of responsibility of
not misleading people or not allowing
people to mislead themselves not
allowing people to be misled
maybe when you have no no bad intentions
yourself right one of my
most directly felt reasons
for being honest with people may be a
strange way to put it but
i mean it one of the reasons i have
for being disruptively honest with
people
that i feel keenly and immediately in
those moments
when i'm dealing with them is the
element of the unknown
a lot of times there's social pressure
on me to just tell kind of convenient
half-truths and lies right
and then we all know what's going to
happen next in that conversation
everyone's going to say oh oh good for
you good to hear that um yeah
good conversation is kind of going to
come from nowhere and go nowhere
because of the lack of honesty and again
i'm not just talking about outright lies
here
right just allowing people to be misled
sometimes in ways that nobody is gonna
nobody's gonna complain about afterwards
as having been a lie i remember
i spoke to a young woman who was
studying to get a phd in anthropology
and she told me that she was just buying
an airplane ticket
to go and do some kind of special
internship
for lack of a better word kind of a
study placement
with a certain university in thailand
where she was going to learn all about
buddhism well at that time i was deep
into whatever my decade of being a
scholar of buddhism was pretty much at
the end of it
and i'd been to that university and i'd
met those professors i'd been in that
department i'd been to that university
with my own interest
being in in buddhist studies and of
course it would have been the
easiest thing in the world for me to say
good for you
oh i'm i'm happy to hear that or i i
could have even you know
done sort of name dropping and say oh
say hello to professor
so-and-so when you're there i remember i
had a cup of tea with him the last time
i was it was
that last time i visited the campus you
know oh oh really hello
yes you know you could have this kind of
polite society level of perpetually
dishonest discourse all right and i
didn't do that
all right i was honest i was honest in a
way
that wouldn't allow her to mislead
herself
and i told her that she's probably going
to the one place in thailand where she
will learn
absolutely nothing about buddhism where
she could learn more by staying in the
airport
lobby and interviewing airport staff
about what's going on in buddhism in
thailand rather than going to this
university and dealing with the
particular professors there right
now i could hear digress into why that
is but she was going to a
really terrible situation and i knew it
i knew it would be a disaster and i also
knew i'd never
hear back from her about what happened
afterwards
so she went away to thailand months
later she came back
and my wife bumped into her i wasn't
there we shared this conversation my
wife now my ex-wife
um my wife bumped into her
and she said so you know how were things
with the the placement the special
assignment you did in in thailand of
course this woman she stiffened
right up and you know told the most
unconvincing lie
in the world which certainly in british
culture is
you know requisite oh oh fine it was it
was great everything was really oh it's
you know um
one of the fundamental reasons i have
for honesty
is that i think people don't learn from
the exchange of
lies and i think that we really do learn
and we learn
unexpected things from being honest with
others
and being honest with ourselves now this
same woman was a phd student at the time
you know she had an article that she
co-wrote
she was part of a circle of authors who
wrote this terrible article
and she'd shown that article to a huge
number of people
before publication not just formal peer
review
and she showed it to me right
and i told her this is through email
correspondence i
i think this was probably the last
conversation we had by email because she
never taught me that
i told her in no uncertain terms this
is garbage and very fundamentally
you are illiterate in the language that
you are quoting
which was pali whereas it's a language i
can read
you're lying about what the text says
you're lying about what it means this
whole article
is based on a series of of lies and
you're not even aware of the extent to
which you're lying because you can't
read the text you're quoting from like
everything about this article
was mind-blowingly awful
and i wasn't i mean i wasn't being cruel
to her
right i was being honest and it wasn't
i wasn't just being honest i was putting
her in a position
where she couldn't mislead herself
now there's several different elements
of honesty and dishonesty that follow
soon after this one of them is in her
reply to me by email it was very brief
but she just said something like well
you know um
nevertheless this was a good heuristic
device for exploring the issue she made
this completely
nonsensical uh academic
this statement coached in needlessly
obscure academic language
uh that you know nevertheless this was
uh
despite everything that may be factually
wrong with the article nevertheless this
had some kind of tremendous
positive value um
all right same woman
some number of days or weeks later i
forget
bumps into my ex-wife in a grocery store
my wife of the time all right she bumps
into her in a grocery store
she knows who she is she knows her
connection to me and in no time flat
no contacts in the like vegetable aisle
she breaks down weeping
right she breaks down weeping to my
ex-wife about how
dramatically this email i sent impacted
her where i was pointing out
here's what's wrong with your article
bang bang bang bang and not
not stating it in any uncertain or
equivocal or flattering terms
it was honest but it was factual it was
bored and she's weeping
in the produce section when she bumps
into my
ex-wife and well actually i told me she
said one of the main things she said
here is you know
you know isil is really honest with
people like
he's trying to help you and when he said
in that message that he's telling you
this
because no one else will tell you and
there were very few other experts alive
who can tell you and the ones that are
alive the other experts that they won't
tell you they won't be able to
you know he's really honest like you
have to know this like he's really
honest
of course if you can value it right that
would make me uh
that would make me uh valuable for my
honesty
right so already there's an interesting
gap there
right she could have sent an email to me
she could have said to me
honestly that this was extremely
upsetting for her
right she could have had that
conversation with me right she didn't
she repressed it
she sent me a totally dishonest email
and then this you know repressed
maybe she wept silently with no one
hearing her before this maybe she wept
alone in her apartment but then
obviously this came out when she
happened to bump into my ex-wife and
they were not friends they weren't just
not close friends they were not friends
period the two of them this is her
breaking down weekend with a complete
stranger
at the at the grocery store right now if
she
had but if she had been honest with me
you know if she had written back to me
honestly with email you can imagine that
conversation could have gone further
right same thing about that university
in thailand she was going to
if she had been honest with me we could
have had a really productive
conversation or series of conversations
about doing research on buddhism in
thailand and what she could do with
limited
limited time unlimited money so like
they're really a lot positive
right but she couldn't be honest now
another thing caught my eye about that
article
and there was a professor whom i
knew um
thanked in the footnotes
he and i had gone through different
periods of talking a lot about our
research
and then not talking at all for it's not
but he was someone i
had an intense and uh tempestuous
friendship with he was someone i met
face to face just once we talked for
several hours and otherwise the whole
relationship was by email
um he was a very passionate
deeply flawed scholar of buddhism
but i'd known him already at that time
for many years and you know what he
probably regarded me also
as a very passionate and deeply flawed
scholar but
to be fair right um
he had some disadvantages compared to me
though
uh he had a phd which is a big advantage
but uh he was dyslexic
i don't think he really had any ability
in the languages concerned like pally
but if he did you know he had really
severe dyslexia
his ability to use that knowledge
language would be very limited
road to man said look you know i just
had this
young scholar this phd candidate here
show me this article
and you know i see your name thanked on
it
i can't believe i can't believe you
signed off on this
like when she showed this to you i
couldn't say why didn't you tell her
what i told her i can't quite
say that but i could say um
you know i could say why weren't you
honest with her why weren't you honest
there about
how bad and wrong this is you know and
you know what in that conversation too
at first
he wanted to just
make the question disappear with some
vague pleasantries
and not in a rude way because i i
assumed he just kind of told her nothing
i assumed he had just sent her like the
equivalent of a twitter response he sent
her a two sentence or something saying
yeah yeah whatever publish it like that
was what i assumed
um so i was just trying to have a
productive conversation and said well
look
here are the things i really found
outstandingly wrong about it and
here's why i think it's really important
to let people know you know i was
talking through in a meaningful sense
why it's important for people like him
and people like me but personally i came
in a position of power
to really let students know when they're
factually wrong
about this kind of thing and they're on
the wrong track going further
so i kept in effect kept pressing in
this conversation
and then he took the time to write me a
long email saying that look when he
received
that essay there was so much wrong with
it and he said this this this this and
this
you know pointing out what's wrong with
that and he said if she took that
constructive criticism and then flushed
it in the toilet and ignored it that's
none of his business but he did what he
could because he thought
and then that moment so he hadn't seen
the final published article you'd only
seen it when should
and i said well look this is hilarious
i'm so
glad you told me that all the things you
just told me the criticisms you
gave her what you said was wrong with
her article right
that she caught she copied and pasted
that out of your email
and she put it in a footnote because
there's a footnote here
like it's like footnote 7 or something
which basically says like
oh yes well um it may be that like every
single thing claimed in this article is
completely false
like it was just the most surreal
footnote it's like it says like
well some scholars may uh contradict
this point about this
like it was like this footnote
indicating that
somebody somewhere knows that this is
complete [ __ ]
you know but nevertheless we're going to
continue this right
here's the problem whatever
wording he used when he told her this
he might have thought he was being
honest right in a sense he was
right but he wasn't being honest enough
his way of putting it to her was
delicate enough
was discreet enough was indirect enough
or was even dishonest enough
that she could continue to mislead
herself
right there's a difference between just
telling the truth it's different between
just not lying just not being a scam
artist
and really being disruptively honest in
a way so that people
are not misled or so that people can't
continue to be misled because they may
already want to believe something
without you coming out and lying to them
right
it's easier to visualize this when we're
talking about one-to-one relationships
like your relationship with your own
parents
right again if you were writing letters
longhand you've moved to a new city
you've started a new life
and you're trying to let your parents
know what's going on think about
what a creative writing challenge that
is and
think about how different your parents
impression might be
if they were receiving those letters for
a number of years and then suddenly they
showed up at your apartment
and saw the reality of what you they
show up unannounced uninvited
unexpected and they say whoa this was
the impression i got from the letters
and now here i see
how you're really living and what your
life is really about right
for better or worse right and you might
feel that you weren't trying to mislead
them
in those letters but maybe you weren't
being honest
enough right and it does take
creativity and it does take energy and
effort
and frankly it takes a willingness
to make people break down crying
in the [ __ ] supermarket in the
produce section
right you have to be willing to really
take it
that far right
i got fan mail last time the last time i
talked about the difference between
mere honesty and this higher level of
not letting people be misled
you know i think every single piece of
fan mail i got related to people's
romantic lives
wasn't that i forget it was four people
or five people
nobody wrote to me about their
professional lives that way probably
some people not something yeah i know
what it's like to have a boss or an
employee or a co-worker
and the difference between telling the
truth and making sure people aren't
being misled about a work situation that
brings a lot of
stories to mind for me also right like
look
do you have any idea how many situations
i've been in
where i could have made a lot of money
just by letting people be misled
right do you have any idea how many
situations i've been in where i could
have had
sex with a very attractive woman just by
letting her be misled
like i don't even have to lie because
she's already lying to herself like she
already wants this i just got to let her
tell the lies yourself and it's like no
i've got a commitment
to my personal integrity where i'd
rather live in poverty
than make money by living a lie or i'd
rather live in
relative celibacy i'd rather not
have sex with someone at all if it's
going to be on this basis even
even if the lies you know are lies that
i have not told
right but when i'm in these situations
i've got to say i personally i don't
feel temptation i don't
when i'm in these situations what i feel
most immediately
is that question of what's unknown
because if i lie even if i lie just a
little bit i'm just a little bit
dishonest and give someone a pleasant
answer
that lets everyone kind of go home and
you know enjoy the
lets everyone shake hands and part
company on good terms and nobody breaks
down weeping at the grocery store
you know if i do that i'll never know
what would have happened next what would
have been revealed
if i'd really been honest that's always
what i
feel you know urgently in the moment is
if i'm not honest about this now
you know then i'll never know i'll never
find out and
part of what you're finding out is who
that other person really is
and how they really feel and who you
really are
a little bit too a little a little tiny
part of yourself
that you might have concealed from
yourself a little tiny part of how you
feel
right you might be confused you might be
concealing some of your own feelings
from yourself even right and that will
also you know uh
come to the surface i had a brief
conversation
was very memorable with a woman
who had a crush on me five years ago
before i'd met melissa well this is my
current
super high commitment long-term partner
right
and truth be told five years ago or
whatever the hell it was now it might be
closer to six years ago now
you know what i was interested in her
too and at that time
neither one of us admitted to the other
right so we were
we were just friends right a million
years go by
we don't talk i have a long term high
commitment relationship she has some
number of
long-term i can't remember you know
whatever you know she gets back in touch
with me
and the reality of the situation is i'm
talking to her and i'm interested in
being
just friends you know and this this most
recent conversation
and he just like that woman getting a
phd in buddhism
maybe i'll never hear from her again
because i chose to be honest right
i still choose that i'd still prefer
that silence
than having a friendship that's based on
phoniness and lies and deception
and self-deception right this most
recent conversation i had with her
you know right at the beginning she was
writing to me and asking
in effect what kind of relationship we
had and what kind of relationship we
could have
going forward and i was saying
look i'm i'm out here looking for a kind
of intellectual
relationship and i sent her a link to a
youtube video where i was talking about
the books i was reading
and what kind of research i was doing
what was going on in my life i said yeah
i was saying in effect look we can be
friends but this is what's going on in
my life intellectually and if you want
to be a part of that
you can jump in and you're welcome but
you know that's that's all that's
there for you and i said several times
in several different ways that no
there was no possibility of a romantic
relationship between us
and i you know i'm also not single
but i mean that's not enough you've
really got to be honest with people
because trust me if you're not honest
there are people who will wait
for years for when you are single right
like
like if you just say oh well i'm not
single some people are going to
interpret that as oh okay i'll call back
when you are
you know that's not the best you want
the other person picking up here right
so this this conversation you know went
on to a point where she was getting
more insistent and more demanding about
what kind of relationship she wanted to
have with me
and she said right at the beginning you
wanted to be an exclusive relationship
also
and like as i remember i was i'm dialing
up and looking at the earlier
messages like nothing i was saying
before this was unclear
you know like i don't think i've been
leading around i'm not leaning like i'm
going back and looking
it's like okay you know what i'm gonna
really be honest
because if i'm not honest i never know
you know i never know if i could be
friends with this person if there is you
know i'd never know
you know whatever what i meant to her in
the past or why it is she thinks this
way but now
if i'm dishonest right
and i said to her look the truth is
yes you know more than five years ago
i had a crush on you and you had a crush
on me and we really didn't know
very much about each other you know i
know you a lot
better now and the truth is it's not
possible
nothing like this ever was possible
between us
there is no parallel universe in which
you turned out to be
the mother of my children there is no
alternate reality in which you and i
ended up as a couple
and you were raising my daughter that
that just doesn't exist that's just not
possible
we just don't have that much in common
and i think it's fair to say
she is never going to talk
to me again
from my perspective i'm being
really honest on social media all the
time
i'm not misleading i'm not claiming to
be single when i'm attached i'm not you
know
i think there's no smoke screen
whatsoever
but one thing she said really briefly in
passing during that conversation which
was a mix of
voice and text she said really briefly
well i don't even know if you're single
because i mean looking through your
social media
it looks like you
said some words to that effect and when
she said that it struck me it was like
whoa it has never occurred to me
that someone could like scroll through
my youtube videos
and like just read the titles and
through the magic
of like seeing only what you want to see
you know engaging in cherry picking the
same way christians read the bible
and they only pick out the pastors that
suit their own agenda right that someone
could scroll through that
you know and see me as single or see me
as indicating that i've
broken a mother or that i'm available or
that i'm looking for
or anything like that right
but that's the situation we're so often
in here on social media
right people find you
they have some clear notion of what you
want to be in their minds
and if you aren't disruptively honest
with them if you don't
take the time and make that effort right
they will be misled
the deepest problem with what maddie lin
berner is doing here
is that she is disclaiming
responsibility
for her own life of active deception
she's not coming on camera and saying
that she now recognizes
she has spent the last five years making
money
by deceiving the world she is continuing
to lead this
much deeper lie she's living this lie
that she's being completely honest
but that somehow through the vagaries of
social media
the people in our audience are deceiving
themselves
[Music]
maybe we can we can practice